ACCEPTED VERSION

This is the accepted version of the following article:

David M. Huang, Scott A. Mauger, Stephan Friedrich, Simon J. George, Daniela Dumitriu-
LaGrange, Sook Yoon, and Adam J. Moulé
The consequences of interface mixing on organic photovoltaic device characteristics
Advanced Functional Materials, 2011; 21(9):1657-1665

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

which has been published in final form at http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201002014

This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance with the Wiley
Self- Archiving Policy [ https://authorservices.wiley.com/author-resources/Journal-
Authors/licensing/self-archiving.html ].

PERMISSIONS

http://www.wiley-vch.de/cta/physsci-en

 2. Accepted Version. Wiley-VCH licenses back the following rights to the Contributor in the
version of the Contribution that has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication
(“Accepted Version”), but not the final version:
a. The right to self-archive the Accepted Version on the Contributor’s personal website, in the
Contributor’s company/institutional repository or archive, in Compliant SCNs, and in not-for-
profit subject-based repositories such as PubMed Central, subject to an embargo period of 12
months for scientific, technical and medical (STM) journals following publication of the Final
Published Version. There are separate arrangements with certain funding agencies governing
reuse of the Accepted Version as set forth at the following website:
www.wiley.com/go/funderstatement. The Contributor may not update the Accepted Version
or replace it with the Final Published Version. The Accepted Version posted must contain a
legend as follows: This is the accepted version of the following article: FULL CITE, which has
been published in final form at [Link to final article]. This article may be used for non-
commercial purposes in accordance with the Wiley Self-Archiving Policy
[https://authorservices.wiley.com/author-resources/Journal-Authors/licensing/self-
archiving.html].

15 June 2021

http://hdl.handle.net/2440/65980

The Consequences of Interface Mixing on Organic Photovoltaic Device
Characteristics

By David M. Huangb, Scott A. Maugera, Stephan Friedrichc,
Simon J. Georged, Daniela Dumitriu-LaGrangea, Sook Yoona, and Adam J. Mouléa∗

[a] Prof. A. J. Moulé, Scott A. Mauger, Dr. D. D. LaGrange,

1 Introduction

Dr. Sook Yoon
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science Department
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
E-mail: amoule@ucdavis.edu
[b] Dr. David M. Huang
School of Chemistry & Physics
The University of Adelaide
SA 5005, Australia

[c] Dr. Stephan Friedrich

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
7000 East Ave., L-188
Livermore, CA 94550, USA
[d] Dr. Simon J. George

Advanced Biological and Environmental X-ray Facility
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
1 Cyclotron Road Mail Stop 6R2100
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

[*] Prof. A. J. Moulé - To whom correspondence should be

addressed
Keywords: Photovoltaic Devices, Solar Cells, Conducting
Polymers, Organic Electronics, Charge Transport

Abstract

Organic bulk-heterojunction solar cells are being developed as
a low-cost alternative to inorganic photovoltaics. A key step to
producing high-efﬁciency bulk-heterojunction devices is ﬁlm
curing using either heat or a solvent atmosphere. All of the
literature examining the curing process have assumed that im-
provement of the bulk-heterojunction morphology is the reason
for the increased ﬁlling factor, short-circuit current density, and
efﬁciency following heat or solvent treatment. We show in this
article that heat treatment causes the donor polymer (P3HT)
and polymer electrode (PEDOT:PSS) to mix physically to form
an interface layer. This interface layer is composed of a mixture
of P3HT and PSS in which the P3HT is oxidized to P3HT+.
This mixed layer affects the open-circuit voltage and compen-
sation voltage by limiting the dark current. This result implies
that a simplistic description of the P3HT/PEDOT:PSS contact
as a sharp interface between bulk P3HT and bulk PEDOT:PSS
cannot adequately capture its electrical characteristics.

The study of organic photovoltaic (OPV) materials and devices
is a rapidly growing scientiﬁc ﬁeld that is gaining increasing
technological relevance. A recent NREL ceriﬁed power conver-
sion efﬁciency (PCE) record of 8.13% was reported in 2010.[1]
Efﬁciency records such as these show that OPV technology
is increasingly capable of competing with other thin-ﬁlm PV
technologies. However, many questions about basic device
physics still persist.

Polymer-based solar cells consist of several polymer, copoly-
mer, and mixed polymer/fullerene layers with thicknesses less
than 100 nm, as shown in Figure 1. Since the layers are so
thin, the properties of the interfaces dominate the electrical
function of the layers. For this reason, an understanding of
the interface morphologies of the polymers used in these de-
vices is needed. There are two types of interfaces in a bulk-
heterojunction (BHJ) OPV device. First and most studied are
the interfaces between the donor and acceptor materials in the
BHJ layer. The mixture of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT)
and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) is the
most studied BHJ layer material. One of the main concerns
in recent years has been control of the layer morphology in
bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) mixtures of donor polymers with
fullerene acceptors.
It has been shown that the use of ther-
mal treatment, solvent soaking, or solvent additives can greatly
improve the PCE by curing the BHJ morphology.[2–4] For a
BHJ layer composed of P3HT mixed with PCBM, curing the
BHJ layer results in increased domain size, hole mobility, and
crystallinity of the P3HT.[5–7] All articles describing the ef-
fects of curing the morphology have assumed that changes to
the BHJ morphology and resulting electronic changes are the
sole reason for changes to device properties.

The second type of interface is that between material layers,
such as electrode and BHJ layers and it is this type of interface
that will be the focus of this article. The BHJ layer is typically
coated onto a substrate of indium-tin oxide with a thin layer
of
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate))
(PEDOT:PSS) on top. PEDOT:PSS is used as the polymer
anode in virtually all organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)
and organic photovoltaics (OPV). This electrode material is
so widely used because it is insoluble in organic solvents, has
a well-deﬁned work function (F
) of around 5.1 eV,[8] is a

1

OPV devices on PEDOT:PSS layers is that the PEDOT:PSS
is able to accept holes from nearly any polymer, regardless of
the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the
polymer. Scharber et. al. showe that the open circuit volt-
age (Voc) of BHJ OPV devices depends only on the energy
gap between the HOMO of the polymer and the lowest unoc-
cupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the fullerene.[24] In or-
ganic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) a barrier for hole injection
from the PEDOT:PSS into a polymer layer is a well-established
phenomenon.[25] Recent work using ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopy has shown that the barrier for hole injection into
PEDOT:PSS is lower than expected in some devices.[26] For an
OPV device in which P3HT with a F
of 4.7 eV has to inject a
hole into PEDOT:PSS with a F of 5.1 eV the contact appears to
be Ohmic and no net energy loss occurs. It has been suggested
that either the orientation of the polymer at the interface or the
formation of a surface dipole layer could change the injection
barrier.[27, 28]

We show in this article that the Voc also depends on the de-
gree of mixing between PEDOT:PSS and the BHJ polymer. We
also show that upon heating, P3HT in the mixed layer is oxi-
dized to P3HT+ by reaction with HPSS at the anode/BHJ in-
terface. This electrochemical reaction increases the selectivity
for hole transport of the cathode and ultimately leads to an in-
creased device PCE. Thus, we show that thermal treatment not
only impacts performance through its effect on the BHJ mor-
phology, as is traditionally assumed, but also through its effect
on the anode/BHJ interface.

2 Results and Discussion

In the following sections, we use contact angle (q c) mea-
surements, X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES),
and neutron reﬂectometry (NR) to show that P3HT physi-
cally mixes with PEDOT:PSS upon heating. Then we use
UV/VIS/NIR and FTIR spectroscopy to show that P3HT is ox-
idized to P3HT+ in the mixed layer by reaction with excess
HPSS. Finally we use Kelvin force probe and current density
– voltage (J–V) measurements to show that formation of this
mixed interface layer increases the Voc of OPV devices. A com-
plete analysis of the J–V data is in preparation for a separate
publication.

The focus of this article is structural and chemical changes
at the active layer/PEDOT:PSS interface. Rather than char-
acterize the structure of complete devices, we focus on the
P3HT/PEDOT:PSS interface by preparing samples comprising
a layer of P3HT deposited on a layer of PEDOT:PSS on glass or
silicon substrates. Mixtures of P3HT/PCBM or pure P3HT on
PEDOT:PSS gave identical results for all of the tests relating
to formation of the interface layer, so for simplicity, only the
results for pure P3HT will be listed. Samples were subjected
to different heat-treatment temperatures and washed repeatedly
with chlorobenzene (CB), in which P3HT is soluble, in order to

Figure 1: Schematic of a typical polymer solar cell with (from
top to bottom) a Ca/Ag cathode, a polymer:fullerene active
layer consisting of a mixture of P3HT (electron donor) and
PCBM (electron acceptor), a PEDOT:PSS hole-transporting
layer, and an ITO anode on a glass substrate.

hole conductor, and forms an ionomer, so the dopant PSS−
does not separate from the PEDOT matrix due to Coulombic
attraction.[9] There is experimental evidence that, when spin
coated in air, PSS and PEDOT forms vertically segregated
layers with PSS at the top surface.[8] Further research in this
area has shown that PEDOT:PSS microdomains form that are
rich in PEDOT near the center and have little PEDOT at the
surface. Upon heating, the PEDOT-rich domains form lateral
(in plane) domains that are much more higly conductive than
perpendicular to the ﬁlm surface.[10–12]

Several organic or inorganic material have been investi-
gated for use as ”hole only” replacements for PEDOT:PSS.[13]
The desired properties for this layer are an Ohmic contact
to the HOMO of the donor polymer in the BHJ layer, opti-
cal transparancy, ease of preparation and deposition, and se-
lectivity to hole transport, which can also be written as elec-
tron blocking. The use of a PEDOT:PSS replacement anode
composed of a blend of 4,4’-bis[(p-trichlorosilylpropylphenyl)-
phenylamino]biphenyl (TPDSi2) poly[9,9-dioctylﬂuorene-co-
N-[4-(3-methlypropyl)]-diphenylamine (TFB) has also been
shown to offer greater hole selectivity than PEDOT:PSS.[14]
The group of Karl Leo has published a number of articles that
detail the increase in electrode selectivity for mixtures of evap-
orated hole transport materials that form doped hole selective
layers.[15, 16] V2O5 and NiO have also been investigated for
use as PEDOT:PSS replacement electrodes.[17–19] Although
isolated results have been published using these other electrode
materials, PEDOT:PSS was used as the anode material for all
veriﬁed device records.

PEDOT:PSS is considered metallic because it has a contin-
uous density of the states at the Fermi level.[20, 21] Unlike
a typical metal, PEDOT:PSS does not have a large free elec-
tron density and so the F
on PEDOT:PSS does not change
greatly with contact to other materials, i.e. large dipole layers
do not form.[22, 23] One interesting phenomenon with BHJ

2

determine whether any sort of physical or chemical bonding be-
tween P3HT and PEDOT:PSS takes place upon heat treatment.
The formation of a mixed interface layer has been previously
studied with much less detail for hole injection layers on PE-
DOT:PSS surfaces for OLED applications.[29]

2.1 Layer Mixing

The large difference between the hydrophobicities of P3HT and
PEDOT:PSS makes contact angle (q c) measurements a sen-
sitive probe of the presence of these materials at a surface
that may consist of one or both of these two components. To
conﬁrm the presence of an interlayer at the PEDOT:PSS/bulk-
heterojunction interface, a series of bilayer samples were fab-
ricated. These samples were heated to various temperatures
and then the P3HT was washed off using CB. Figure 2 shows
the q c of a water droplet on ﬁlms of PEDOT:PSS, P3HT on
PEDOT:PSS, and P3HT on PEDOT:PSS washed with CB af-
ter heat treatment, versus the heat-treatment temperature. As
shown in Figure 2, the q c of P3HT (i.e. P3HT on PEDOT:PSS)
is the same (107◦) for heat treatment at room temperature and
180◦C. This q c was therefore assumed to be constant over the
temperature range studied. On the other hand, the q c of PE-
DOT:PSS decreases slightly from 15◦ to 5◦ with increasing
heat treatment temperature from room temperature to 180◦C.
This behavior could be due to an increasing predominance of
the more hydrophilic PSS at the surface as a result of ther-
mal annealing. For the heat-treated samples with P3HT on
PEDOT:PSS washed with CB, q c shows a distinct transition
around 150◦C from a q c similar to that of PEDOT:PSS to one
resembling that of P3HT, indicating the presence of a P3HT
surface layer for the washed samples heated above 150◦C.

120

100

.

g
e
d
/

c

e
l
g
n
a

t
c
a
t
n
o
c

80

60

40

20

0
0

30

c)

PEDOT:PSS (q
P3HT on PEDOT:PSS, heat (q
P3HT on PEDOT:PSS, heat, wash (q

c)

c)

P3HT on PEDOT:PSS, heat, wash (f)

90

60

120
heat treatment temperature T  /°C

150

180

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

f

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

e
c
a
f
r
u
s
T
H
3
P

210

0
240

Figure 2: Contact angle (measured at room temperature) of a
water droplet on ﬁlms of PEDOT:PSS, P3HT on PEDOT:PSS,
and P3HT on PEDOT:PSS washed with chlorobenzene after
heat treatment vs heat-treatment temperature. Also shown is
the fraction f of the surface covered by P3HT on the washed
samples estimated from Equation (1).[30]

3

To quantify the presence of P3HT at the interface, the frac-
tion f of the surface covered by P3HT on the washed samples
was calculated at each temperature T using the Cassie–Baxter
equation [30],

cosq c = f cos q P3HT + (1 − f ) cosq PEDOT:PSS ,

(1)

where q P3HT and q PEDOT:PSS are the measured contact angles of
water on P3HT and PEDOT:PSS respectively (assuming that
q P3HT is the same at all temperatures). The surface cover-
age of P3HT on washed samples was calculated to increase
from 0 to ∼5% at 150◦C and then to jump to over 80% at
180◦C and above, as shown in Figure 2. This result indicates
an almost monolayer coverage at these high temperatures and
clearly demonstrates that P3HT is tightly bound (either physi-
cally or chemically) to PEDOT:PSS upon heating to tempera-
tures of 150◦C and above, indicating the formation of an inter-
mixed layer between the two materials. Similar q c experiments
performed with PCBM on PEDOT:PSS showed that PCBM
does not form an interlayer with PEDOT:PSS, since the con-
tact angle was identical for PEDOT:PSS and for PEDOT:PSS
that had PCBM spin-coated then washed off of it.

We used X-ray absorption spectroscopy to determine the
chemical composition of the mixed layer because it is a sensi-
tive technique to measure the element-speciﬁc bonding struc-
ture. For samples much thicker than the X-ray absorption
length, the absorption can be recorded by monitoring either
the total electron yield (TEY) or the partial ﬂuorescence yield
(PFY) emitted from the sample in response to the core hole
excitation. Since the electron escape depth of several nm is
much shorter than the 1 µm escape depth for soft X-rays, TEY
measurements of the X-ray absorption provide information on
surface chemistry, while PFY measurements provide comple-
mentary information about bulk chemistry.

We have taken X-ray absorption spectra of PEDOT:PSS and
P3HT samples, with and without P3HT on top, before and after
heating, on the carbon K absorption edge. Figure 3 shows the
surface-sensitive TEY data, while the PFY data are shown in
the supporting material in Figure S1. The TEY spectra show
ﬁve peaks that have been assigned as follows: 283.6 eV to the
p ∗ transition of carbon reduced by either Na+ or H+, 284.8 eV
to the p ∗ transition that corresponds to aromatic carbon and
is broadened by the C–S bond,[31, 32] 287 eV to the C–H
bonds associated with the alkane chain[31] with possible con-
tributions from the C–O bonding group[32], 288.2 eV to the
p ∗ transition from C–H bonds associated with an aromatic ring
[31], and ﬁnally transitions >290 eV to s ∗ transitions.

To differentiate between signals coming from the PEDOT
and PSS polymers, we compared samples of Na+PSS− to
untreated PEDOT:PSS and heated PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms. The
Na+PSS− spectrum has strong features at 284.7 eV and 288.5
eV which indicate the presence of aromatic carbon and aro-
matic carbon hydrogen bonds, respectively. While all samples
will have aromatic carbon, only PSS has a lot of C–H bonds
to aromatic carbons. The heated PEDOT:PSS ﬁlm also has

q

higher intensity features at 284.7 eV and 288.5 eV than the
unheated PEDOT:PSS sample. We take this as conﬁrmation
of previously reported data that shows that upon heating, the
PSS moiety moves to the sample surface.[8] Supporting this
conclusion is a reduction of intensity for the 287 eV peak for
heated PEDOT:PSS, which indicates reduced C–O bond and
C–H (non-aromatic) character at the surface, indicating the ab-
sence of PEDOT. A XANES spectrum of P3HT (dotted line)
shows greatly reduced intensity for the p ∗ peak at 284.7 eV
and a high-intensity peak at 287 eV indicating the presence of
alkane chains. There is no discernable peak at 288.5 eV.

Next a sample of PEDOT:PSS that had P3HT washed off af-
ter heating to a temperature of 150◦C was measured. For sim-
plicity, this sample will be refered to as “washed”. The washed
sample shows peak intensity both at 287 eV and 288.5 eV. Since
the 287 eV peak is associated with P3HT alkane chains and the
288.5 eV peak with the aromatic C–H bonds of PSS, it can be
concluded that both P3HT and PSS are present in the top sev-
eral nm of the sample surface. The peak at 284.7 eV is larger
in the washed sample than for either the unheated PEDOT:PSS
or P3HT. This is further conﬁrmation of increased PSS as the
surface.

The washed data was ﬁt by numerically averaging the
Na+PSS− and pure P3HT spectra with a 6:5 ratio. Note that
this data cannot be directly compared to the surface coverage
calculated using the Cassie-Baxter equation and q c data be-
cause the XANES experiment has a sensitivity to a greater pen-
etration depth at the sample surface. The ﬁt spectra exactly
reproduce the line shape and suggest that only P3HT and PSS
are present at the surface and that PEDOT is not within several
nm of the surface. That a numerical average of two separate
spectra can be used to reproduce the washed-sample data indi-
cates that the PSS and P3HT are forming a mixed layer. It also
indicates that the bonding structure of both polymers remains
intact. There is no indication of bond breaking or bond for-
mation between PSS and P3HT. A change in bonding structure
would cause a shift of electron density around the atoms and
therefore a shift in the XANES spectrum or formation of new
peaks.

The PFY spectra (Supporting Information Figure S1) show
nearly identical spectra for PEDOT:PSS with and without heat-
ing and P3HT washing. This indicates that the change in the
surface has very little effect on the bulk of the ﬁlm.

Neutron reﬂectivity measurements provide information of
ﬁlm composition as a function of depth. Neutron reﬂectivity
data for selected samples are shown in Figure 4a, along with ﬁts
to the data using a slab model for the scattering length density
(SLD) proﬁle of the ﬁlm. The SLD proﬁles near the top (air) in-
terface obtained from the model ﬁtting are shown in Figure 4b
for selected samples. (The neutron reﬂectivity data and ﬁts and
modeled SLD distributions for all measured samples are given
in Figures S2 and S3, respectively, of the Supporting Informa-
tion.) The SLDs of PEDOT:PSS, r PEDOT:PSS, and P3HT, r P3HT,
were obtained from the ﬁts of the neutron reﬂectivity data for

-
+
Na
PSS
PEDOT:PSS, untreated
PEDOT:PSS, 150°C
P3HT
PEDOT:PSS+P3HT, 150°C, wash
PEDOT:PSS+P3HT, 150°C, wash (fit)

3

2

1

.
u
.
a
/

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

0
282

284

286
288
Energy  /eV

290

292

Figure 3: X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES)
spectra of the carbon K edge of Na+PSS−, untreated PE-
DOT:PSS, PEDOT:PSS heated to 150◦C, P3HT, and P3HT on
PEDOT:PSS that was heated to 150◦C and then washed with
chlorobenzene. The points are a numerical average of the
curves for the heated PEDOT:PSS ﬁlm and the P3HT ﬁlm with
a weighting of 6:5.

the samples with only PEDOT:PSS and only P3HT, respec-
tively, on silicon. The values of r PEDOT:PSS = 1.80 × 10−6 Å−2
and r P3HT = 0.786 × 10−6 Å−2 are consistent with those calcu-
lated using the NIST SLD Calculator[33] from the molecular
formulas of PEDOT, PSS, and P3HT and approximate den-
sities of 1.1 g/cm3 for these polymers of 1.68 × 10−6 Å−2
(assuming a 1:6 mixture of PEDOT and PSS with SLDs of
1.85 × 10−6 Å−2 and 1.49 × 10−6 Å−2) and 0.68 × 10−6 Å−2,
respectively.

Figure 4b shows that SLD proﬁles of the untreated PE-
DOT:PSS ﬁlm and the ﬁlm in which P3HT was spin-coated
on to PEDOT:PSS and then washed with CB without heat
treatment are virtually indistinguishable, indicating the absence
of P3HT on the latter ﬁlm, which is consistent with q c and
XANES results. For the ﬁlms that were heat treated after depo-
sition of P3HT on to PEDOT:PSS but before washing with CB,
the interface width (twice the "roughness" s ) is larger than that
of the untreated PEDOT:PSS ﬁlm and increases with tempera-
ture, from 3.4 nm for the ﬁlm heated to 150◦C to 6.4 nm and
7.0 nm respectively for the ﬁlms heated to 180◦C and 210◦. The
increased interface width could be due to (1) increased rough-
ness of the interface, (2) vertical segregation of PSS and PE-
DOT (with PSS nearer the surface), or (3) the presence of P3HT
on the surface, which could also be intermixed with PEDOT
and PSS. Unfortunately, the ordering of the magnitudes of the
SLDs, r P3HT < r PSS < r PEDOT, makes it difﬁcult to distinguish
between these three cases. However, the absence of an increase
in the measured surface roughness measured by AFM with heat
treatment (not shown) allows us to rule out case (1). We also
ﬁnd that the ﬁt to the neutron reﬂectivity data for the 210◦C-

4

a)

b)

Figure 4: (a) Neutron reﬂectivity data and model ﬁts for an un-
treated PEDOT:PSS ﬁlm and for P3HT on PEDOT:PSS heated
to 210◦C then washed with chlorobenzene (both on silicon
wafer substrates). (b) Scattering length density (SLD) proﬁles
vs distance from the top surface of the ﬁlm from ﬁts to reﬂec-
tivity data for untreated PEDOT:PSS, unannealed P3HT on PE-
DOT:PSS washed with chlorobenzene, and heat-treated P3HT
on PEDOT:PSS washed with chlorobenzene, heated to 150◦C,
180◦C, and 210◦C. Only the region close to the top (air) inter-
face is shown.

heated ﬁlm is noticeably improved when a several-nanometer
layer of P3HT is assumed to exist on top of the PEDOT:PSS
layer (as shown in Figure 4) instead of simply assuming a rough
PEDOT:PSS interface. The 150◦C- and 180◦C-heated samples
do not seem do have a distinct P3HT layer, but a thin layer with
lower SLD is clearly present. When analyzed in the context
of the other measurements, the neutron reﬂectivity results indi-
cate that the bi-layer samples heated above 150◦C form a few
nanometers of P3HT intermixed PEDOT:PSS, with a predom-
inance of PSS over PEDOT near the interface. After washing
with a good solvent for P3HT this intermixed layer remains.

5

The neutron reﬂectivity results also show that heating to higher
temperatures increases the thickness of the intermixed layer.

2.2 Mixing Mechanism

We showed in section 2.1 that with heating, P3HT mixes with
PEDOT:PSS at the interface and that the PEDOT:PSS vertically
segregates so that the interface layer is composed almost en-
tirely of PSS and P3HT. Further, we showed that the P3HT
in this layer becomes insoluble. There are three mechanisms
that can be imagined to explain the formation of this insoluble
P3HT/PSS layer:

1. P3HT chemically reacts with PSS upon heating leading to
the breaking of some conjugated bonds and the formation
of new P3HT/PSS chemical bonds;

2. P3HT physically mixes with PSS upon heating and be-
comes trapped in a mixed layer, but remains uncharged;

3. P3HT physically mixes with PSS upon heating and elec-

trochemically reacts to form P3HT+ and PSS−.

Mechanism (1) is unlikely because there is no evidence of
the formation of new bond types in the XANES data (Figure 3).
We further tested whether new bonds form by comparing FTIR
plots (Supporting Information Figure S4) of ground powder
mixtures of PEDOT:PSS and P3HT before and after heating
to 180◦C for one hour. Comparison of the two spectra show
essentially identical peak ratios for all bond types. We expect
that the most likely possible reaction is an acidic attack of the
thiophene ring of P3HT by the HSO3 group of PSS. If this re-
action occured a new peak at 2535 cm−1 would appear for a
S–H bond.[34] Since this peak is absent, we conclude that no
bond forming or bond breaking reaction occurs between P3HT
and PSS upon heating.

Mechanism (2) and (3) can be distinguished by whether
the P3HT becomes oxidized by the PSS or whether it is sim-
Presented in Figure 5 are
ple mixing of neutral species.
UV/VIS/NIR difference spectra for a PEDOT:PSS/P3HT ﬁlm
that has been treated to increasing heating temperatures. Fig-
ure 5a shows the spectra of the heated ﬁlms subtracted by the
spectrum of the room temperature (RT) ﬁlm in the visible and
Figure. 5b shows the same data on a different scale in the near
infrared (NIR). The spectra are displayed in this manner be-
cause separate diffraction gratings are required to cover the two
measurement ranges and because P3HT+ has a much lower ab-
sorbance than P3HT.

Figure 5a (visible wavelengths) shows that mild heating (up
to 120◦C) increases the P3HT absorption, probably due to in-
creased ordering in the ﬁlm.[35] However at higher temper-
atures, visible absorption increasingly bleaches. Figure 5b
(NIR) shows the growth of an absorption peak centered at
∼ 900 nm.[36] This NIR peak has been assigned previously to
P3HT+.[37, 38] The fact that P3HT+ is formed with increased

is reduced. We are not able to quantify the extent of the elec-
trochemical reaction from the NIR spectra in Figure 5b because
the (1) conjugation length of P3HT, (2) the mixing ratio of the
PSS and P3HT, (3) the exact thickness of the intermixed layer,
and (4) the absorption coefﬁcient of P3HT+ cannot be mea-
sured to sufﬁcient accuracy. The bleaching of P3HT in Fig-
ure 5a cannot be used to determine the reaction extent because
the intermixed layer represents such a small fraction of the to-
tal absorbance and some absorbance change also occurs due to
changes in the BHJ morphology.

2.3 Electrical Effects of Interlayer Formation
Both HPSS and PSS− are unconjugated and so do not transport
charges. This means that the oxidized P3HT at the interface
is the only charge carrier. The presence of an oxidized P3HT
layer suggests the Fermi level in the intermixed layer is much
closer to the HOMO of P3HT than the LUMO. We used Kelvin
force probe measurements to determine the Fermi level at the
interface and then current-voltage measurements to determine
the effect that this electronic change has on the OPV device
performance.

Kelvin force probe measurements make a direct measure-
ment of the Fermi energy of a surface.[39] The work function
(F
) of the surface, deﬁned as the minimum energy required
to remove an electron from the surface.[40] We prepared two
sets of PEDOT:PSS samples with and without P3HT coated on
top. The samples were heated at temperatures ranging from
room temparature to 210◦C for 5 minutes. The samples were
then all washed multiple times with CB. Then the Fermi en-
ergy of the samples was measured. The samples that were pure
PEDOT:PSS all have continuous and partially ﬁlled density of
states (DOS) at the Fermi energy, so F
is directly measured
and shows values near the literature reported value of -5.2 eV
(Figure 6). F
increases slightly with increasing heat treatment,
which means that more PSS on the surface makes it more dif-
ﬁcult to remove an electron from the surface. For the P3HT
washed samples, the measured Fermi energy decreases with
increasing heat treatment temperature. This result is also ex-
pected. The reported value of the oxidation potential of the
P3HT HOMO level is -4.74 eV with respect to vacuum mea-
sured using cyclic voltametery[41] and ∼4.5 eV measured us-
ing ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy.[42, 43] As P3HT
mixes with PSS the most easily removed electron comes from
the HOMO of P3HT and so F
of the surface is reduced. This
change in the F
shows that no vacuum level shift occurs at the
interface between P3HT and PEDOT:PSS, as has been previ-
ously reported.[42]

The F measurements allow us to make several conclusions.
First, the F
of the mixed P3HT/PSS layer is set by the P3HT
is the same for mixtures of
within the layer. Second,
P3HT/PSS as for pure P3HT. Finally, since F
is the same for
150◦C, 180 ◦C, and 210◦C P3HT washed samples, very little
or extensive material mixing between P3HT and PSS does not

Figure 5: UV/VIS/NIR difference spectra of bi-layer samples
of PEDOT:PSS/P3HT heated to 90◦C, 120◦C, 150◦C, 180◦C,
and 210◦C.

heating is proof that the mixing is accompanied by oxidation
of P3HT in the mixed layer. The PEDOT:PSS used for hole-
only layers in OPV devices has a PEDOT:PSS ratio of 1:6. The
much larger PSS content means that most of the PSS is present
as either HPSS or Na+PSS−. Earlier work showed that both
HPSS and NaPSS are present in commercial solutions of PE-
DOT:PSS with NaPSS being the minority product.[8] We as-
sign the following mechanism for the oxidation of P3HT:

2 P3HT + 2 HPSS ⇄ 2 P3HT+ + 2 PSS−

+ H2 ,

(2)

This mechanism indicates that the P3HT is oxidized by
HPSS to P3HT+ and HPSS is reduced to PSS−, which makes
sense considering that the proton is very loosely bound in
HPSS, which has a pKa of 1.2. We veriﬁed this mechanism
by mechanically mixing a pellet of powdered HPSS and P3HT
in a sealed container and then heating to 180◦C for 10 min and
then injecting the gas above the pellet into a gas chromatograph
mass spectrometer (GCMS). As seen in Figure S5 in the Sup-
porting Information, H2 is detected in the case where P3HT and
HPSS are heated. This is most likely a multi-step reaction, the
details of which are beyond the scope of this publication.

Since we see no clear difference in the FTIR spectrum, we
believe that only a fraction of the HPSS in the thin mixed layer

6

F
after spin coating and after heating to 180◦C. It can be seen
that the Jsc and ﬁll factor (FF) of the CB/NB-cast devices are
nearly identical in the as-cast and heated devices, but that both
of these characteristics increase greatly upon heating for the
CB-cast device. We have already noted that the morphology of
the CB/NB-cast devices does not change upon heating. The
only clear change in the CB/NB J–V data is an increase of
the Voc from 0.6 V to 0.66 V. By comparison, the Voc of the
CB-cast device drops from 0.72 V to 0.66 V upon heating, as
has been previously reported for increased order in P3HT.[47]
Comparison of the two device types shows that the BHJ mor-
phlogy controls the Jsc and FF while the Voc also depends on
the charge extraction potential at each electrode. Since the pro-
cess of heating these devices causes the formation of a doped
hole conducting interface, the Voc also depends on the interface
layer formation.

2

)

m
c
/
A
m

(
/

J
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
t
n
e
r
r
u
c

V

/

0

V
d
n
a

c
o

V

4

0

-4

-8

-12

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0

CB, as-cast
CB, 180°C
CB/NB, as-cast
CB/NB, 180°C

-0.4 -0.2

0

0.2
applied voltage V  /V

0.4

0.6

Voc (CB)
Voc (CB/NB)
V0 (CB)
V0 (CB/NB)

(a)

0.8

(b)

30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240
heat treatment temperature T  /°C

spin cast

Figure 7: (a) Current–voltage curves of 3:2 w/w P3HT:PCBM
devices
from chlorobenzene (CB) and from
chlorobenzene/nitrobenzene (CB/NB) that were as-cast or heat
treated at 180◦C. (b) Voc and V0 for devices cast from CB or
CB/NB vs heat-treatment temperature.

Figure 7b shows a plot of Voc versus heat-treatment tempera-
ture for a series of CB- and CB/NB-cast devices, in which it can
be seen that Voc for both device types varies non-monotonically.
Voc shows a minimum at 120◦C and is the same for heat-

7

Figure 6: Work function measurements performed by Kelvin
probe force microscopy of PEDOT:PSS layers that have or have
not been coated with P3HT.

signiﬁcantly change the work function.

PEDOT:PSS is known as a good hole conductor and hole
only layer. The Kelvin force probe data indicates that the
Fermi level is reduced at the interface to the BHJ layer which,
in principle, reduces the total electric ﬁeld across the BHJ
layer and thereby the probability for separation of photogener-
ated electron-hole pairs.[44] However the presence of oxidized
P3HT in the intermixed layer is highly selective for hole only
transport, which should reduce the dark current and improve
the ﬁll factor (FF) of the OPV device. We have compared the
temperature dependence of current-voltage (J–V ) characteris-
tics for devices cast from CB and CB/nitrobenzene (NB)[45] to
separate the electronic effects due to BHJ morphology changes
and mixed interface layer formation. The solvent additive NB
has been shown to cause aggregation of the P3HT, which leads
to an improved short-circuit current density (Jsc) and FF com-
pared with as-cast devices that are solution cast from solvents
such as CB and o-xylene. We have shown[46] that the NB addi-
tive does not evaporate out of the BHJ ﬁlm, even upon heating
to >150◦C and that the presence of NB increases the onset of
melting of the P3HT/PCBM blend by over 50◦C. These results
mean that, in effect, the morphology of bulk-heterojunction
ﬁlms with NB added does not change signiﬁcantly upon heat-
ing. UV/Vis and ﬂuorescence spectra of ﬁlms heated to 180◦C
are identical to those of as-cast ﬁlms, which shows that the mor-
phology of the ﬁlm is maintained by the presence of the NB.

Figure 7a shows J–V curves for P3HT:PCBM OPV devices
cast from CB and CB/NB. The devices were measured directly

treatment temperatures above 180◦C, but there is no obvious
trend. A plot of the compensation voltage V0 (the voltage at
which the current–voltage curves in the dark and under illumi-
nation cross) versus heat-treatment temperature is also shown
on the same axis. Heating the device up to temperatures of
180◦C clearly increases V0 for both device types. Interestingly,
V0 is nearly identical for both device types in Figure 7b as a
function of the heat-treatment temperature. The value of V0
in BHJ solar cells is the applied voltage required to compen-
sate for the work function difference between the HOMO of
the donor at the anode and the LUMO of the acceptor at the
cathode.[48] Since the two device types have very different
morphologies and very different J–V curves for most of these
temperatures, we must conclude that something in addition to
the bulk-heterojunction layer controls V0. We recently reported
that the onset of melting for P3HT samples with NB present is
increased to over 180◦C,[46] which indicates that for BHJ lay-
ers heated below 180◦C the morphology with or without NB
present is different. V0 can be changed by the effects of band
bending, formation of an interface dipole layer, or doping of
the material at the interface. Correlation of the heat-treatment
temperature dependence of the V0 for both samples with the
temperature dependence for the formation of P3HT/PSS inter-
layer (reported above) indicates that the increase in V0 with in-
creased heat treatmnt temperature is due to the formation of
a PSS/P3HT interlayer with doped P3HT present. For a heat
treatment temperature of 210◦C the V0 is reduced for both sam-
ple types. This is due to increased thickness of the interlayer
that also increases the device series resistance. A separate de-
tailed article that discusses the how morphology and mixed in-
terface layer separately affect the current-voltage characteris-
tics of OPV devices is in preparation.

The electrical properties of the device change because of the
interlayer formation. HPSS and PSS are insulators. It can be
assumed that the charge transport through the ∼3–7 nm thick
interlayer occurs through the P3HT. Small-molecule OPV de-
vices are fabricated with a donor/mixed/acceptor layer structure
in order to increase the selectivity of charge transport to the two
electrodes.[49] The increased compensation voltage V0 with the
formation of the interlayer, shown in Figure 7a, is indirect evi-
dence of increased electrode selectivity for holes.

3 Conclusions

In conclusion, we have shown that heat
treatment of
P3HT/PCBM bulk-heterojunction layers that are deposited
onto PEDOT:PSS hole transport layers leads to material mixing
of the layers. Speciﬁcally, at temperatures at and above 150◦C
the P3HT forms an interlayer with PSS from the PEDOT:PSS.
This mixed interlayer forms a 3-5 nm thick layer and is com-
posed of a mixture of P3HT+ and PSS−. After formation, the
mixed interlayer is insoluble to both organic solvents and to
H2O. The oxidized P3HT is the charge carrier, and since it is

doped, it is very selective to hole transport. The work function
of the mixed interlayer is nearly identical to the HOMO level
of the P3HT, which indicates p-doping of the P3HT. Exami-
nation of the heat treatment temperature dependence of devices
that were fabricated with differing morphologies shows that the
formation of the mixed interlayer affects the open circuit volt-
age and increases the compensation voltage.

4 Experimental

Materials and Device Fabrication: All devices were fabricated
on indium tin oxide (ITO) glass slides that had been etched
with acid to a speciﬁed shape using a mask. The substrates
were then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with chloroform, ace-
tone, mucasol, and deionized water. Prior to spin coating
a ∼40 nm polyethylenedioxythiophene:polystyrenesulphonate
the ITO substrates were
(PEDOT:PSS; H.C. Starck) layer,
placed in an ozone plasma for 30 min. The PEDOT:PSS-
coated ﬁlms were dried at 110◦C for 3 min and then
immediately taken into an N2 glovebox. Mixtures of
3:2 w/w poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT; Reike Metals):phenyl-
C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM; Nano-C) were dissolved
into chlorobenzene and then spin-coated onto the PEDOT:PSS
surfaces to create ﬁlm layers of 80 nm, as measured using a
calibrated Dektak surface proﬁlometer. For some of the de-
vices, nitrobenzene was added to the spin-coating mixture di-
rectly before spin coating. Next, the samples were moved to a
high vacuum chamber, where Ca/Ag electrodes were thermally
evaporated through a shadow mask. All subsequent heating and
measurement using the solar simulator were performed in the
glovebox.

Samples for the washing experiments and reﬂectometry ex-
periments were prepared on either cleaned glass slides or on sil-
icon wafers with a native oxide layer. The cleaning steps were
the same as described above. PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on
to the substrate followed by either P3HT or a mixture of P3HT
and PCBM. The layered ﬁlms were heated in the glovebox us-
ing a calibrated hot plate. The washing was performed by cov-
ering the entire ﬁlm with chlorobenzene and then spinning the
ﬁlm. This process was repeated three to ﬁve times to ensure that
any polymer not physically or chemically bound to the surface
was washed away. Washing by soaking in an ultrasonic bath of
chlorobenzene was also carried out, but gave the same contact
angle results as those presented in this paper for the samples
washed by spin-coating.

Device Measurements: AM1.5 light was provided by a ﬁl-
tered Xe lamp. The light intensity was calibrated using a Si
photodiode but no mismatch factor was applied to the measure-
ments. The J–V measurements were performed using a Keith-
ley 2420 source measurement unit.

Contact Angle Measurements: Contact angle measurements
were performed on a leveled goniometer stage. A droplet of
H2O was placed on the sample surface and then the contact an-

8

gle was measured using a height-adjusted microscope camera
and angle-determination software.

XANES Measurements: X-ray absorption near edge structure
(XANES) data were taken at beam line 4.0.2 of the Advanced
Light Source synchrotron at the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. The incident beam energy was scanned in incre-
ments of 0.5 eV in the energy range below the carbon K-edge
from 250 to 275 eV, in 0.1 eV increments over the near-edge re-
gion from 275.1 to 300 eV, in increments of 0.2 eV from 300.2
to 330 eV and in increments of 0.5 eV in the featureless region
from 330.5 to 360 eV. The slit settings were reduced to 20 µm
/ 20 µm and the incident beam was defocused to a spot size of
roughly 1 mm2 to avoid radiation damage to the ﬁlm samples.
The incident beam intensity I0 was measured with a 95% trans-
missive gold grid after the refocusing mirror, and the total elec-
tron yield (TEY) was measured with a Photonis Channeltron
Electron Multiplier (model CEM 4716). A custom-designed
superconducting tunnel junction X-ray spectrometer[50] was
used to simultaneously record the X-ray ﬂuorescence from the
sample for each incident energy, and the intensity of the car-
bon K line used as a measure of the partial ﬂuorescence yield
(PFY). Both TEY and PFY signals were normalized by I0 and
set to unity in the ﬂat region of 350 to 360 eV above the ab-
sorption features. Offset voltages were carefully zeroed so that
the spectra not contain any of the structure in I0 due to a small
carbon contamination of the monochromator.

Neutron Scattering Measurements: Neutron Reﬂectometry
Measurements: The properties of the thin-ﬁlm layers of sam-
ples of PEDOT:PSS and/or P3HT spin-coated onto silicon
wafer substrates and subjected to various heat and solvent treat-
ments were determined by neutron reﬂectometry. The neutron
reﬂectometry measurements were carried out using the Sur-
face Proﬁle Analysis Reﬂectometer (SPEAR) at the Manuel
Lujan Jr. Neutron Scattering Center at the Los Alamos Na-
tional Laboratory. A collimated neutron beam was directed
at a sample at an incident angle of q
. The reﬂectivity R, de-
ﬁned as the ratio of the intensity of the specularly reﬂected
neutron beam to that of the incident beam, was measured as
a function of the momentum change perpendicular to the sur-
face, Qz = (4p sin q )/l
, also known as the momentum transfer
vector. Here l
is the wavelength of the neutrons. The measured
reﬂectivity was ﬁt to a slab model, in which the sample ﬁlm was
assumed to consist of a series of n parallel layers, where layer i
has a thickness di and constant scattering length density (SLD)
i, sandwiched between super- (air) and subphases (silicon) of
inﬁnite extent. Interlayer "roughness" s
i,i+1 , which could in-
clude contributions from actual roughness between layers or
from interlayer mixing, was accounted for by an error func-
tion SLD proﬁle centered at the interface connecting the SLDs
of the adjacent layers i and (i + 1). Model ﬁtting to the mea-
sured data for log R vs Qz was carried out with the Levenberg-
Marquardt nonlinear least-squares method using the MOTOFIT
program[51], in which the reﬂectivity proﬁle is calculated us-
ing the Abeles matrix method[52]. The scattering length den-

sities of air, the silicon substrate, and native oxide layer on the
substrate were taken to be r air = 0, r Si = 2.07 × 10−6 Å
, and
r SiO2 = 3.47 × 10−6 Å
, respectively.[51] For simplicity, the
roughnesses above the Si and SiO2 layers were assumed to be
zero.

−2

−2

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the US Department of Energy
EERE Solar America Initiative under Contract No. DE-FG36-
08GO18018. The thank LANL for neutron reﬂectometry mea-
surement time at the LANSCE-SPEAR facility and measure-
ment help obtained from Erik Watkins and Jarek Majewski. We
thank the ALS for providing beam time. Part of this work was
performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of En-
ergy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Con-
tract DE-AC52-07NA27344.

References

[1] M. Osborn, New polymers push Solarmers OPV efﬁciency

to record 8.13 percent, www.pv-tech.org, 2010.

[2] H. Hoppe, N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem. 2006, 16, 45–

61.

[3] G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao, J. S. Huang, Y. Yang, J. Mater.

Chem. 2007, 17, 3126–3140.

[4] A. J. Moulé, K. Meerholz, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2009, 19,

3028–3036.

[5] T. Erb, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, S. Raleva, B. Stuhn,
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf, C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater.
2005, 15, 1193–1196.

[6] V. D. Mihailetchi, H. X. Xie, B. de Boer, L. J. A. Koster,
P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2006, 16, 699–708.

[7] X. N. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees,
M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels, R. A. J.
Janssen, Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 579–583.

[8] G. Greczynski, T. Kugler, M. Keil, W. Osikowicz,
M. Fahlman, W. R. Salaneck, J. Elect. Spectros. Rel. Phe-
nom. 2001, 121, 1–17.

[9] S. Kirchmeyer, M. Reuter, J. Mater. Chem. 2005, 15,

2077–2088.

[10] A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink, R. A. J. Janssen, J. A. M.
Bastiaansen, N. M. M. Kiggen, B. M. W. Langeveld,
A. van Breemen, M. M. de Kok, Adv. Mater. 2007, 19,
1196–1200.

9

r
[11] A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink, R. A. J. Janssen, Phys. Rev.

[27] F. Zhang, A. Vollmer, J. Zhang, Z. Xu, J. P. Rabe,

B 2007, 76, 085208–7.

N. Koch, Organic Electronics 2007, 8, 606–614.

[12] A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink, M. M. de Kok, E. Vinken,
K. Maturova, R. A. J. Janssen, Org. Electron. 2008, 9,
727–734.

[28] G. Heimel, I. Salzmann, S. Duhm, J. P. Rabe, N. Koch,
Advanced Functional Materials 2009, 19, 3874–3879.

[29] J.-S. Kim, R. H. Friend, I. Grizzi, J. H. Burroughes, Appl.

[13] R. Steim, F. R. Kogler, C. J. Brabec, Journal of Materials

Phys. Lett. 2005, 87, 023506.

Chemistry |2010|, 20, 2499–2512.

[30] A. B. D. Cassie, S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc. 1944, 40,

[14] A. W. Hains, A. B. F. Liu, J. Martinson, M. D. Irwin, T. J.

546–551.

Marks, J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20, 595–606.

[15] B. Maennig, J. Drechsel, D. Gebeyehu, P. Simon, F. Ko-
zlowski, A. Werner, F. Li, S. Grundmann, S. Sonntag,
M. Koch, K. Leo, M. Pfeiffer, H. Hoppe, D. Meissner,
N. S. Sariciftci, I. Riedel, V. Dyakonov, J. Parisi, Applied
Physics a-Materials Science & Processing 2004, 79, 1–
14.

[16] K. Walzer, B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo, Chem. Rev.

2007, 107, 1233–1271.

[17] G. Li, C. W. Chu, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yang, Applied

Physics Letters 2006, 88, 253503.

[18] H. H. Liao, L. M. Chen, Z. Xu, G. Li, Y. Yang, Applied

Physics Letters 2008, 92, 173303.

[19] M. D. Irwin, B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang,
T. J. Marks, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 2008, 105, 2783–
2787.

[20] J. Hwang, F. Amy, A. Kahn, Org. Electron. 2006, 7, 387–

396.

[21] Y. Kim, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley,

Org. Electron. 2009, 10, 205–209.

[22] C. Tengstedt, W. Osikowicz, W. R. Salaneck, I. D. Parker,
C. H. Hsu, M. Fahlman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 88,
053502.

[23] S. Braun, M. P. de Jong, W. Osikowicz, W. R. Salaneck,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 2007, 91, 202108.

[24] M. C. Scharber, D. Wuhlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk,
C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger, C. L. Brabec, Adv. Mater. 2006,
18, 789–794.

[25] M. Gross, D. C. Muller, H. G. Nothofer, U. Scherf, D. Ne-
her, C. Brauchle, K. Meerholz, Nature 2000, 405, 661–
665.

[26] S. Bange, A. Kuksov, D. Neher, A. Vollmer, N. Koch,
A. Ludemann, S. Heun, Journal of Applied Physics 2008,
104, 104506.

10

[31] D. Schmeisser, M. Tallarida, K. Henkel, K. Müller,
D. Mandal, D. Chumakov, E. Zschech, Mater. Sci. Pol.
2009, 27, 141–157.

[32] S. K. M. Jonsson, M. P. de Jong, L. Groenendaal, W. R.
Salaneck, M. Fahlman, J. Phys. Chem. B 2003, 107,
10793–10800.

[33] National

of
Center

Standards
for

nology
search,
http://www.ncnr.nist.gov/resources/sldcalc.html.

Length Density

Institute
(NIST)
Scattering

and
Neutron

Tech-
Re-
Calculator:

[34] K. Peter, C. Volhardt, N. E. Schore, Organic Chemistry:

Structure and Function, Freeman and Co., 2003.

[35] M. M. Bouman, E. E. Havinga, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W.
Meijer, Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals Science
and Technology Section a-Molecular Crystals and Liquid
Crystals 1994, 256, 439–448.

[36] R. Osterbacka, C. P. An, X. M. Jiang, Z. V. Vardeny, Sci-

ence 2000, 287, 839–842.

[37] K. H. Yim, G. L. Whiting, C. E. Murphy, J. J. M. Halls,
J. H. Burroughes, J. S. Kim, Adv. Mater. 2008, 20, 3319–
3324.

[38] C. Y. Kao, B. Lee, L. S. Wielunski, M. Heeney, I. Mc-
Culloch, E. Garfunkel, L. C. Feldman, V. Podzorov, Ad-
vanced Functional Materials 2009, 19, 1906–1911.

[39] O. Tal, W. Gao, C. K. Chan, A. Kahn, Y. Rosenwaks,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 2004, 85, 4148–4150.

[40] D. Cahen, A. Kahn, Adv. Mater. 2003, 15, 271–277.

[41] P. Zacharias, M. C. Gather, M. Rojahn, O. Nuyken,
K. Meerholz, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2007, 46, 4388–
4392.

[42] M. Fahlman, A. Crispin, X. Crispin, S. K. M. Henze,
M. P. d. Jong, W. Osikowicz, C. Tengstedt, W. R. Sala-
neck, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2007, 183202.

[43] S. Braun, W. R. Salaneck, M. Fahlman, Adv. Mater. 2009,

21, 1450–1472.

[44] L. J. A. Koster, E. C. P. Smits, V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M.

Blom, Physical Review B 2005, 72, 085205.

[45] A. J. Moulé, K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater. 2008, 20, 240–245.

[46] L. Chang, H. W. A. Lademann, J. Bonekamp, K. Meer-
holz, A. J. MouleÃ ˇNÂ ˛A, Adv. Funct. Mater. (In Press)
2011.

[47] M. Campoy-Quiles, Y. Kanai, A. El-Basaty, H. Sakai,
H. Murata, Organic Electronics 2009, 10, 1120–1132.

[48] V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen,
P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 216601.

[49] P. Peumans, S. Uchida, S. R. Forrest, Nature 2003, 425,

158–162.

[50] S. Friedrich, O. B. Drury, S. J. George, S. P. Cramer, Nuc.

Inst. & Meth. Phys. Res. 2007, 582, 187–189.

[51] A. Nelson, J. Appl. Cryst. 2006, 39, 273–276.

[52] O. S. Heavens, Optical Properties of Thin Solid Film,

Dover, New York, 1991.

11

Supporting Information for “The Consequences of Interface
Mixing on Organic Photovoltaic Device Characteristics”

David M. Huang, Scott A. Mauger, Stephan Friedrich,
Simon J. George, Daniela Dimitriu LaGrange, Sook Yoon, and Adam J. Moulé

PEDOT:PSS, untreated
PEDOT:PSS, 180°C
P3HT on PEDOT:PSS, untreated
P3HT on PEDOT:PSS, 180°C, wash

2

1.5

1

0.5

.
u
.
a
/

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

0
282

284

286
288
Energy  /eV

290

292

Figure S1: X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra of the carbon K edge of untreated PE-
DOT:PSS (solid line), PEDOT:PSS heated to 180◦C (dotted line), untreated P3HT on PEDOT:PSS (dashed
line). and P3HT on PEDOT:PSS that was heated to 180◦C and then washed with chlorobenzene (dot-dashed
line).

References

[1] T. A. Chen, X. M. Wu, R. D. Rieke, Journal of the American Chemical Society 1995, 117, 233–244.

1

1

-2

10

-4

10

10

-6

1

-2

10

-4

10

10

-6

1

-2

10

-4

10

10

-6

1

-2

10

-4

10

-6

10

R

R

R

R

(a)

(c)

(e)

(g)

(b)

(d)

(f)

0.12

0.16

0.04

0.08
-1
Qz  /Å

expt
fit

0

0.04

0.08
-1
Qz  /Å

0.12

0.16

Figure S2: Reﬂectivity R vs momentum transfer vector Qz from measurements (points) and ﬁts (lines) of
various samples on silicon wafers: (a) PEDOT:PSS, (b) P3HT, (c) unwashed P3HT on PEDOT:PSS, and
P3HT on PEDOT:PSS heated then washed with chlorobenzene, with heat treatment temperature of (d) room
temperature, (e) 150◦C, (f) 180◦C, and (g) 210◦C.

2

(a)

(c)

(e)

(g)

4

3

2

1

0

3

2

1

0

3

2

1

0

3

2

1

)

2
-

Å

6
-

0
1
(
/

D
L
S

)

2
-

Å

6
-

0
1
(
/

D
L
S

)

2
-

Å

6
-

0
1
(
/

D
L
S

)

2
-

Å

6
-

0
1
(
/

D
L
S

(b)

(d)

(f)

0

20

40
z  /nm

60

80

0
-20

0

20

40
z  /nm

60

80

Figure S3: Scattering length density SLD vs distance from the top surface of samples from ﬁts to the
measured reﬂectivity data in Figure S2: (a) PEDOT:PSS, (b) P3HT, (c) unwashed P3HT on PEDOT:PSS,
and P3HT on PEDOT:PSS heated then washed with chlorobenzene, with heat treatment temperature of (d)
room temperature, (e) 150◦C, (f) 180◦C, and (g) 210◦C.

3

Figure S4: FTIR spectra of mixed P3HT/PEDOT:PSS before (line) and after (dotted line) heat treatment at
180◦C. The P3HT and dried PEDOT:PSS were mixed as powder samples in a mortar and pestle with KBr.
Half of the samples was subsequently heated to 180◦C. Then both samples were mechanically pressed and
measured in transmission in the FTIR. The differences in the spectra come from sample geometry. There
is no evidence of new peak formation or a change in the peak ratios. Assignments of the peaks were taken
from Chen et. al.[1]

4

Figure S5: Gas chromatograph mass spectometry of a gaseous sample taken from a vial with a mixture of
HPSS and P3HT that had left at room temperature (upper) and that had been heated to 180◦C for 10 min.
The vial that had been heated has a H2 peak, indicating that the proposed mechansim is correct.

5


